# Ultra-low-power-wireless
An ultra low power wireless solution to log data over a long period of time without relying on a dedicated power supply.

Ultra-Low Power Wireless
SE 221 Semester Project


Jake Zukauska, Erik Reis, Ashish Jayan, and Ashley Schaaf



Introduction
Ultra-low power wireless networks is an ongoing research for low power consumption and improved device capability. Overall, the implementation would result in lower cost, smaller size, and lower power options compared to today’s available technology. Depending on the size of the network and amount of nodes it contains, these three factors are handled accordingly within ultra-low power wireless. Power consumption plays a large role in next generations of wireless sensing system studies. By combining ultra-low power wireless communications and possible energy harvesting devices, sensors arranged in remote or non-remote areas will be more efficient, resulting in less interruptions throughout years of performance. Distortion in data transfer and standby/wake-up receivers are the other factors to improve efficiency and power consumption. While data is being transferred between network devices, distortion in the data and noise interference occurs. The goal with this new pragmatic communication system theory is not to reduce distortion but to tolerate it. Distortion in a communication network is inescapable thus makes the theory of a distortion-tolerance design ideal. By ignoring distortion, information transmitted will surpass the limits of Shannon channel capacity which consists of a distortion-free communication (Wu & McGowan, 2012). Implementing a new receiver function would affect the power consumption because power is consumed whenever the receiver is active. By having a separate wake-up receiver and main receiver, which is on standby until activated by the monitoring wake-up receiver, the network in whole would have an improved performance and less network latency.
Associate Professor Jingxian Wu of the University of Arkansas specializes in Intelligent Information Sensing, Processing & Transmission Lab in the Department of Electrical Engineering. He received a grant from National Science Foundation in 2012 for his studies towards low power wireless networks that are distortion-tolerated. Wu and his doctoral student, Ning Sun, continue to report their learnings and further improving the information regarding IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communication. In University of California, Nathan Michael Pletcher is a Doctor of Philosophy in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. He, along with his co workers, studied the abstract wake-up receiver implementation of an ultra-low power wireless sensor network (WSN). Several other researchers are listed within the resource section.
Characteristics
        	Ultra-low power wireless provides an opportunity for systems to work efficiently while interacting ultra-low powered wireless modules to collect data and use it for its processes. One example that can be considered is a smart home thermostat system. A smart thermostat can use multiple nodes of sensors around the inside and the outside to measure the temperature in certain zones of the home or office environment. These modules will be stick on the wall devices that can be charged or use batteries or be wired into a home’s mains to send the temperature of the zone to the main smart thermostat system for it to analyze and turn on heat in specific areas of the home. This type of system allows for an energy efficient method to collect data from these nodes as well as save energy on heating with the use of such as system.
        	There are many types of similar technologies in the current market that make use of similar wireless sensor kits to record movements, send temperature data, rain sensor for the sprinkler system, and many other subsystems that make use of wireless sensors. Honeywell especially as an organization focuses alot on internet connected devices that make use of portable power to transmit sensor readings of door status, motion sensors; these systems range around the 200-300-dollar price range for the full system (HoneyWell, n.d.).
        	How the ideal low power wireless works is by transmitting data only in short bursts and turning off all radios while waiting to gather new data. For example, if a system is to read door status and transmit this data to another system it would need to wait until a user closes or opens the door, it then sends the time and the status of the door to the main system. It then returns to power saving mode until an action is done again. With this method, the Ultra-low power wireless system can limit its wireless and transmission time only when it needs to, otherwise save power and use very little power similar to a sleep functionality of a computer.
        	The current model presented by the project team members make use of a module called ESP8266 Esp-12E and a DHT11 temperature and humidity sensor to log data to a website. The module uses 3.3v and uses around 200-300mA in its transmitting time for a couple seconds and uses 10μA when not transmitting and in sleep mode.
The functionality of the module is as follows:
1.      Turn On.
2.      Record data and send the data to a visualization server for monitoring data.
3.      Go to Deep Sleep instantly and wait for an hour using the built in real time clock.
4.      After an hour of Deep Sleep, the module repeats all the steps again in a loop.
This type of model is very efficient for a data logging system that uses specific periods of intervals to record data that needs to be transmitted. If the team members decide to use an energy harvesting module instead, the solar panel can charge the battery while in Deep Sleep for a system that can last infinitely without the need for replacing batteries. Another option that the team members could have followed is to use a low-power real time clock chip like the M41T62LC6F that only uses a mere 350 nA and can make the wireless module go completely turned off thus using no power to run the module and make it turn on when it’s time for transmission.
Motivations and Benefits
        	Research into ultra low power wireless has become more prevalent throughout recent years due to multiple benefits surrounding its uses. One of the biggest benefits of the ultra low power wireless model is the ability to build basic units at very low costs while still being able to invest more money into higher power units that may be needed, depending on the intended uses of the system. The model used as a prototype for this project totaled out to $19.74, which includes the raw parts and the power source used. Another strong benefit to the unit is how efficient the low power that it is named for really is. An example of this is the unit used as a prototype for this research, which can transmit at maximum output for 84 days straight without needing to replace or charge the power source. The final benefit to be discussed is the fact that each unit is wireless and, therefore, mobile. By not requiring any set physical connection in order to collect data, an ultra low power wireless device can use a much larger range of areas for data collection, without having to worry about additional infrastructures.

Applications
        	Ultra low power wireless has many practical uses that are improved upon over using other methods. As mentioned above, one of the key benefits of ultra low power wireless is the long-lasting battery life that allows for each unit to be left in use for extended periods of time without constantly checking on the sensor. This makes the ultra low power unit a great tool for data gathering in research that requires multiple having data from multiple points over a long period, such as requesting the current temperature at set intervals of time in order to record how temperature changes in different areas and at what rates. The low monetary cost of ultra low power wireless units also for cheap testing from multiple different locations without having to worry too much about the security of the unit or having the unit lose power which could skew the data.
        	Another practical use of an ultra low power wireless system is to test when a certain condition is met in the location of the sensor. An example of this would be using the sensor to determine if it is currently raining at the location the sensor is placed. The sensor can be set to retrieve the relative humidity and use that number to calculate the dew point of the area, which can then be used to determine if it is currently raining at the location of the unit.
Findings
During the course of setting up, and getting used to this new concept of a low power integrated wireless sensor and transmitter, the task is to figure out what application purpose it could ultimately serve. First off, the solution must not be reliant on a constant connection to the device. Since this particular low power solution includes the device shutting off for long periods of time, the data collected at these intervals must suffice. Second, the solution must be in an active wireless network in order to collect data for extended periods of time. The esp8266 connected to a humidity and temperature sensor will allow for the collection of temperature data wirelessly transmitted either offsite or to a local data host.
The team research group proposes using this technology to collect such data in order to make heating and cooling in a building more efficient by creating a tool to allow for dynamic ventilation adjustments. Currently in order to monitor heating and cooling the original design for the system must include multiple zones to control temperature. These zones often have to have their own furnace, air conditioner and thermostats to function. The proposed dynamic ventilation adjustments would considerably lower initial and recurrent heating and cooling costs. The wireless modules can be placed in rooms that are to be regulated independently of any other system.
 Isaac Newton’s law of cooling and law of heating can be modeled by either exponential decay or logarithmic growth respectively.  Using these models, and a node network of sensors, the desired equilibrium temperature can be manufactured by increasing airflow to rooms that are deficit to the ideal temperature and decreasing flow to rooms that have already reached the correct temperature. With enough time to compute proper prediction algorithms, this system could automatically change ventilation dampers and registers at costs much lower than a multiple zoned system.
Ultra-low power wireless consists of a low cost, small size, and low power system network. It is an ideal, long term, and both economically and technically solution by improving communication and wireless system studies. Due to its low cost for smaller network projects, this topic was manageable and appealing. The results from this project showed that ultra-low power wireless is an effective way to gather data remotely in a cost effective and efficient way.














References

Auer, G., Giannini, V., Desset, C., Godor, I., Skillermark, P., Olsson, M., ... & Fehske, A. (2011). How much energy is needed to run a wireless network?. IEEE Wireless Communications, 18(5), 40-49. Retrieved from http://epubs.surrey.ac.uk/735354/1/EARTH%20Book%2 0Chapter.pdf 
HoneyWell. (n.d.). Wireless Thermostat | FocusPRO comfort system. Retrieved from Honeywell: http://yourhome.honeywell.com/en/products/thermostat/programmable-wireless-focuspro-comfort-system
Lee, J. S., & Nguyen, C. (2001). Novel low-cost ultra-wideband, ultra-short-pulse transmitter with MESFET impulse-shaping circuitry for reduced distortion and improved pulse repetition rate. IEEE Microwave and wireless components letters, 11(5), 208-210. Retrieved from http://wcsp.eng.usf.edu/UWB_Testbed _Docs/low_cost.pdf

Pletcher, N. M. (2008). Ultra-low power wake-up receivers for wireless sensor networks. ProQuest.Retrieved from http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1. 139.953&rep= rep1&type=pdf
Wu, J., & McGowan, M. (2012, August). Building Ultra-Low Power Wireless Networks. Retrieved from University of Arkansas: https://news.uark.edu/articles/18986/building-ultra -low-power-wireless-networks


